---
layout: post
title: "Guiding Practice"
categories: practice
tags: [help, self-motivation]
---
I have recently given up on dictating practice times for my students and my
student's parents. The problem with telling a student or parent's telling their
kids that they "have" to practice daily for a set amount of time is that for the
child, practicing becomes a chore that they feel they are enduring. In my
experience, it is unlikely, once practicing has become something to be endured,
that the child will become self-motivated to learn, play or practice their
instrument. This means that once you as a parent or teacher start handing out
rewards for a child having practiced, you've inhibited the child's
self-motivation. Even if the child will work towards the reward in the short
term, when they decide the reward is not worth their time, you will both end up
frustrated.

I think that one of the most effective ways to combat issues with practicing is
for the teacher and the student to agree upon weekly goals. It is then the
responsibility of the student to set daily goals that they want to accomplish.
It is often helpful, particularly with younger students, if parents help out by
setting the small goals for each practice session (of course the parents have to
know what is expected of the student by the teacher for this to be successful).
This ensures that parents are involved and engaged with the child's practice
habits which can be helpful for the child during busy weeks when it may have
been easy to just skip a night or two. Some parents have their children
demonstrate a memorized line or anywhere from 4-8 bars each night. Daily
practicing and goal accomplishments make students proud of what they have
accomplished and often, their pride results in self-motivation.

As a teacher, I have to make sure that my students know what I expect them to
work towards over the short-term span of not just the week but also the upcoming
month. Whether it is a performance at a festival or a recital or just a piece to
put into their expanding repertoire, they know what I want to see in the
following week and an idea of what we are working towards in the upcoming
months. If you are  unsure of what is expected of you (or your child) each week,
ask your teacher to start making a list of the things she wants you to
accomplish over the week. Better yet, you make the list yourself. Review it with
your teacher at the end of your lesson to make sure you have interpreted
correctly and kept track of everything he or she wants.

It might be helpful and fun to come up with a creative idea that makes
practicing self-motivating. A couple of my favourite ideas include the
three-penny game and the painted beans game. The three-penny game is simple.
Three pennies are placed on one side of the stand and each time a troublesome
measure, line or piece is reviewed or worked on, a penny is moved to the
opposite side of the stand. With this method, a troublesome section will be
reviewed at least three times. The painted beans game begins as a fun craft.
With paints, glitter and dried beans, you, or your child, creates magical bean
"money." The student gets to keep the bean money in a bag and an empty bean
piggy-bank beside their stand. When they feel like they have accomplished a
goal, they can pay themselves by adding a bean to the jar. For more ideas you
can check out this link: http://www.npr.org/sections/deceptivecadence/2012/06/18/155282684/getting-kids-to-practice-music-without-tears-or-tantrums.
If you feel like you or your child might need some further motivation, you can
check out the blog "Making Music Fun Again."

----
